<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>Commendatory verses</title>
  <link href="../Styles/estilvorpal.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <h1>SOME COMMENDATORY VERSES</h1>

  <h3 id="id_4">SONNET<br />
  Urganda The Unknown To The Book Of Don Quixote Of La Mancha</h3>

  <p class="poema">If to be welcomed by the good,<br />
  O Book! thou make thy steady aim,<br />
  No empty chatterer will dare<br />
  To question or dispute thy claim.<br />
  But if perchance thou hast a mind<br />
  To win of idiots approbation,<br />
  Lost labour will be thy reward,<br />
  Though they'll pretend appreciation.<br /></p>

  <p class="poema">They say a goodly shade he finds<br />
  Who shelters 'neath a goodly tree;<br />
  And such a one thy kindly star<br />
  In Bejar bath provided thee:<br />
  A royal tree whose spreading boughs<br />
  A show of princely fruit display;<br />
  A tree that bears a noble Duke,<br />
  The Alexander of his day.<br /></p>

  <p class="poema">Of a Manchegan gentleman<br />
  Thy purpose is to tell the story,<br />
  Relating how he lost his wits<br />
  O'er idle tales of love and glory,<br />
  Of "ladies, arms, and cavaliers:"<br />
  A new Orlando Furioso-<br />
  Innamorato, rather—who<br />
  Won Dulcinea del Toboso.<br /></p>

  <p class="poema">Put no vain emblems on thy shield;<br />
  All figures—that is bragging play.<br />
  A modest dedication make,<br />
  And give no scoffer room to say,<br />
  "What! Alvaro de Luna here?<br />
  Or is it Hannibal again?<br />
  Or does King Francis at Madrid<br />
  Once more of destiny complain?"<br /></p>

  <p class="poema">Since Heaven it hath not pleased on thee<br />
  Deep erudition to bestow,<br />
  Or black Latino's gift of tongues,<br />
  No Latin let thy pages show.<br />
  Ape not philosophy or wit,<br />
  Lest one who cannot comprehend,<br />
  Make a wry face at thee and ask,<br />
  "Why offer flowers to me, my friend?"<br /></p>

  <p class="poema">Be not a meddler; no affair<br />
  Of thine the life thy neighbours lead:<br />
  Be prudent; oft the random jest<br />
  Recoils upon the jester's head.<br />
  Thy constant labour let it be<br />
  To earn thyself an honest name,<br />
  For fooleries preserved in print<br />
  Are perpetuity of shame.<br /></p>

  <p class="poema">A further counsel bear in mind:<br />
  If that thy roof be made of glass,<br />
  It shows small wit to pick up stones<br />
  To pelt the people as they pass.<br />
  Win the attention of the wise,<br />
  And give the thinker food for thought;<br />
  Whoso indites frivolities,<br />
  Will but by simpletons be sought.</p>

  <h3 id="id_5">SONNET<br />
  Amadis of Gaul To Don Quixote of la Mancha</h3>

  <p class="poema">Thou that didst imitate that life of mine<br />
  When I in lonely sadness on the great<br />
  Rock Pena Pobre sat disconsolate,<br />
  In self-imposed penance there to pine;<br />
  Thou, whose sole beverage was the bitter brine<br />
  Of thine own tears, and who withouten plate<br />
  Of silver, copper, tin, in lowly state<br />
  Off the bare earth and on earth's fruits didst dine;<br />
  Live thou, of thine eternal glory sure.<br />
  So long as on the round of the fourth sphere<br />
  The bright Apollo shall his coursers steer,<br />
  In thy renown thou shalt remain secure,<br />
  Thy country's name in story shall endure,<br />
  And thy sage author stand without a peer.</p>

  <h3 id="id_6">SONNET<br />
  Don Belianis of Greece To Don Quixote of la Mancha</h3>

  <p class="poema">In slashing, hewing, cleaving, word and deed,<br />
  I was the foremost knight of chivalry,<br />
  Stout, bold, expert, as e'er the world did see;<br />
  Thousands from the oppressor's wrong I freed;<br />
  Great were my feats, eternal fame their meed;<br />
  In love I proved my truth and loyalty;<br />
  The hugest giant was a dwarf for me;<br />
  Ever to knighthood's laws gave I good heed.<br />
  My mastery the Fickle Goddess owned,<br />
  And even Chance, submitting to control,<br />
  Grasped by the forelock, yielded to my will.<br />
  Yet—though above yon horned moon enthroned<br />
  My fortune seems to sit—great Quixote, still<br />
  Envy of thy achievements fills my soul.<br /></p>

  <h3 id="id_7">SONNET<br />
  The Lady of Oriana to Dulcinea del Toboso</h3>

  <p class="poema">Oh, fairest Dulcinea, could it be!<br />
  It were a pleasant fancy to suppose so—<br />
  Could Miraflores change to El Toboso,<br />
  And London's town to that which shelters thee!<br />
  Oh, could mine but acquire that livery<br />
  Of countless charms thy mind and body show so!<br />
  Or him, now famous grown—thou mad'st him grow so—<br />
  Thy knight, in some dread combat could I see!<br />
  Oh, could I be released from Amadis<br />
  By exercise of such coy chastity<br />
  As led thee gentle Quixote to dismiss!<br />
  Then would my heavy sorrow turn to joy;<br />
  None would I envy, all would envy me,<br />
  And happiness be mine without alloy.<br /></p>

  <h3 id="id_8">SONNET<br />
  Gandalin, Squire of Amadis of Gaul, To Sancho Panza, squire of Don Quixote</h3>

  <p class="poema">All hail, illustrious man! Fortune, when she<br />
  Bound thee apprentice to the esquire trade,<br />
  Her care and tenderness of thee displayed,<br />
  Shaping thy course from misadventure free.<br />
  No longer now doth proud knight-errantry<br />
  Regard with scorn the sickle and the spade;<br />
  Of towering arrogance less count is made<br />
  Than of plain esquire-like simplicity.<br />
  I envy thee thy Dapple, and thy name,<br />
  And those alforjas thou wast wont to stuff<br />
  With comforts that thy providence proclaim.<br />
  Excellent Sancho! hail to thee again!<br />
  To thee alone the Ovid of our Spain<br />
  Does homage with the rustic kiss and cuff.<br /></p>

  <h3 id="id_9">SONNET<br />
  From El Donoso, The Motley Poet On Sancho Panza and Rocinante</h3>

  <p class="poema">I am the esquire Sancho Pan—<br />
  Who served Don Quixote of La Man—;<br />
  But from his service I retreat-,<br />
  Resolved to pass my life discreet-;<br />
  For Villadiego, called the Si—,<br />
  Maintained that only in reti—<br />
  Was found the secret of well-be—,<br />
  According to the "Celesti—:"<br />
  A book divine, except for sin—<br />
  By speech too plain, in my opin—<br /></p>

  <h3 id="id_10">SONNET<br />
  On Rocinante</h3>

  <p class="poema">I am that Rocinante fa—,<br />
  Great-grandson of great Babie—,<br />
  Who, all for being lean and bon—,<br />
  Had one Don Quixote for an own—;<br />
  But if I matched him well in weak—,<br />
  I never took short commons meek—,<br />
  But kept myself in corn by steal—,<br />
  A trick I learned from Lazaril—,<br />
  When with a piece of straw so neat—<br />
  The blind man of his wine he cheat—.<br /></p>

  <h3 id="id_11">SONNET<br />
  Orlando Furioso To Don Quixote of La Mancha</h3>

  <p class="poema">If thou art not a Peer, peer thou hast none;<br />
  Among a thousand Peers thou art a peer;<br />
  Nor is there room for one when thou art near,<br />
  Unvanquished victor, great unconquered one!<br />
  Orlando, by Angelica undone,<br />
  Am I; o'er distant seas condemned to steer,<br />
  And to Fame's altars as an offering bear<br />
  Valour respected by Oblivion.<br />
  I cannot be thy rival, for thy fame<br />
  And prowess rise above all rivalry,<br />
  Albeit both bereft of wits we go.<br />
  But, though the Scythian or the Moor to tame<br />
  Was not thy lot, still thou dost rival me:<br />
  Love binds us in a fellowship of woe.<br /></p>

  <h3 id="id_12">SONNET<br />
  The Knight of Phoebus To Don Quixote of La Mancha</h3>

  <p class="poema">My sword was not to be compared with thine<br />
  Phoebus of Spain, marvel of courtesy,<br />
  Nor with thy famous arm this hand of mine<br />
  That smote from east to west as lightnings fly.<br />
  I scorned all empire, and that monarchy<br />
  The rosy east held out did I resign<br />
  For one glance of Claridiana's eye,<br />
  The bright Aurora for whose love I pine.<br />
  A miracle of constancy my love;<br />
  And banished by her ruthless cruelty,<br />
  This arm had might the rage of Hell to tame.<br />
  But, Gothic Quixote, happier thou dost prove,<br />
  For thou dost live in Dulcinea's name,<br />
  And famous, honoured, wise, she lives in thee.<br /></p>

  <h3 id="id_13">SONNET<br />
  From Solisdan To Don Quixote of La Mancha</h3>

  <p class="poema">Your fantasies, Sir Quixote, it is true,<br />
  That crazy brain of yours have quite upset,<br />
  But aught of base or mean hath never yet<br />
  Been charged by any in reproach to you.<br />
  Your deeds are open proof in all men's view;<br />
  For you went forth injustice to abate,<br />
  And for your pains sore drubbings did you get<br />
  From many a rascally and ruffian crew.<br />
  If the fair Dulcinea, your heart's queen,<br />
  Be unrelenting in her cruelty,<br />
  If still your woe be powerless to move her,<br />
  In such hard case your comfort let it be<br />
  That Sancho was a sorry go-between:<br />
  A booby he, hard-hearted she, and you no lover.<br /></p>

  <h3 id="id_14">SONNET<br />
  Between Babieca and Rocinante</h3>

  <p class="poema">B. "How comes it, Rocinante, you're so lean?"<br />
  R. "I'm underfed, with overwork I'm worn."<br />
  B. "But what becomes of all the hay and corn?"<br />
  R. "My master gives me none; he's much too mean."<br />
  B. "Come, come, you show ill-breeding, sir, I ween;<br />
  'T is like an ass your master thus to scorn."<br />
  R. He is an ass, will die an ass, an ass was born;<br />
  Why, he's in love; what's what's plainer to be seen?"<br />
  B. "To be in love is folly?"—R. "No great sense."<br />
  B. "You're metaphysical."—R. "From want of food."<br />
  B. "Rail at the squire, then."—R. "Why, what's the good?<br />
  I might indeed complain of him, I grant ye,<br />
  But, squire or master, where's the difference?<br />
  They're both as sorry hacks as Rocinante."<br /></p>
</body>
</html>
